---
layout: post
title: Good code is Good code, OK?
published: false
---

I was reading a [blog post] by Aidan Fitzpatrick recently, and as is often the case whilst scouring the web for endorsable blog authors, felt some sympathy for the misinterpretations or poor experience I assume Aidan to have been through. I don't believe the experience of trying to improve oneself and their code but failing and thus falling back to old ways, is a particulrly uncommon phenomenon. So it seems appropriate to address some of the points Aidan has raised, in an attempt to help and perhaps even reinspire those suffering similar circumstance, fallen to the wayside in their endeavour for excellence.

## Clarity

There is often some confusion with regards to _clean coding_ (the them typically used by [Uncle Bob] to describe _"good code"_). There exists several [principles, patterns and practices] to assist developers in achieving excellent code. These range from the static [24 OOP design patterns], through the ever growing and adapting array of practices, and the core [SOLID principles].

As a senior developer mentoring juniors, it is crucial that we expose and pass on these teachings. As James Old's blog post [bad code is the first step to good code] correctly identifies, Junior developers will regularly misinterpret these practices, stumbling through their work attempting to _correctly_ apply these practices. This is where your years of being a developer truly shines; a senior developer knows where to draw the lines. The last thing we want is to end up with an [enterprise fizz buzz]!

But that doesn't mean we should sacrifice any code quality! The patterns and practices must still be used, the principles adhered to, the tests written first. That should be obvious, you're a professional, not a _script kiddy_, right?

## The _Best Way_

It's a question we're often posed. 

> "What is the best way to do this?"

That answer differs by so many factors, an experienced programmer with extensive knowledge of clean coding, _just knows_. We're aware of the downfalls of future proofing, but understand the extensibility afforded through clean code. We know if we just follow some very simple principles, we give ourselves the best chance of victory against the onslaught of the weird and wonderful, ever changing requirements.

The best programmers collaborate and keep up to date with the technologies applicable to their field. They've heard about the latest _buzz_, evaluated and indentified use cases, and learned when and when not to use technologies. They have the common sense to spend some time spiking and prototyping before introducing new dependencies to a product. They have the ability to communicate concepts to the team and the mental strength to accept the outcome of collaboration.

Most importantly, when the _best way_ at the time, is no longer the _best way_ for the current requirements, a good developer knows to refactor.

## Being Prepared

Projects will regularly fail if you dive face first into an area or technology for which you have no expertise, regardless of how clean your code is. You'll spend great portions of time refactoring as you adjust application structure to the API you're learning. In such a case, it will feel like following test first was a disatrous decision, sweeping structural changes will require constant changes to the tests.

The _fix_ for this isn't to drop the tests or start writing rubbish code. It's to be prepared.

The product, API, technology, or so forth, you're trying to work with should have been evaluated and researched. Depending on the complexity, a quick glance at a _Getting Started_ page or 10 minutes spiking some code might well be enough to get you going. In other cases, reading extensive documentation, many short (and quickly disposed of) spikes, discussions and research is required. Be prepared, the time spent will *always* be worth it.

## _Quick_ code

Inevitably, bugs leak through, or agreed upon behaviour is contrary to end user intent. The customer will always be a part of your feedback loop, and development methodologies such as [SCRUM] assist us in keeping that feedback loop as short and close as possible.

In startups, putting a product out there might be the best way to perform your market research and determine product viability.

Even senior developers often mistake _clean code_ for _slow code_. Not necessarily in performance, but in the time it takes to write. My response to that is very simple: practice.

As mentioned in a [previous article]

  [blog post]: http://www.reincubate.com/blog/2014/feb/6/good-code-bad-ok/
  [enterprise fizz buzz]: https://github.com/EnterpriseQualityCoding/FizzBuzzEnterpriseEdition
  [Uncle Bob]: http://
  [principles, patterns and practices]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/Principles-Patterns-Practices-Robert-Martin/dp/0131857258/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1434073114&sr=8-1&keywords=robert+c+martin+patterns+practices
  [24 OOP design patterns]: http://www.oodesign.com/
  [SOLID principles]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_(object-oriented_design)
  [bad code is the first step to good code]: https://medium.com/lets-make-things/bad-code-is-the-first-step-towards-good-code-dd9798e25874
  [SCRUM]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)
  [previous article]: http://blog.devbot.net/testing
