---
layout: post
title: Testing
tags: [tests]
published: false
---

I find it easy to fall into the trap of wondering how it is so many people can misunderstand testing. Sure, it's a broad subject and there are far too many (_wrong_) opinions on the subject. But then, it's easy to forget how I was also so very wrong not that many years ago. I too, thought of tests as an optional extra, afforded only to the rich and powerful, not those of us slogging it out in the pits of legacy code, or those of us rushing releases for a new startup.

You'll note, I use the term _us_. I too have in the past, and will continue to work within complicated environments and scenarios. _You_ do not have some _special_ mitigating circumstance that suffices as an excuse to not follow _good_ testing practices; choosing to skip testing is simply unprofessional. The work of the uneducated or worse, lazy, regardless of your title or experience.

##Angry?

That last sentence hit you? Is it not your fault that the culture of your current company doesn't support testing? Is it not your fault that the customers and project managers require releases faster than can be provided when including tests? Is it someone elses fault your legacy code base doesn't have a structure that supports component isolation? Is it someone else's fault for writing a framework you rely on that doesn't support dependency injection?

**You are to blame**.

It most definitely is your fault. Your responsibility. You are the let down, the weakest link. But regardless of situation, of excuse, the situation can be salvaged by _you_.

##_Time_ for change

The most common issue people raise when being introduced to testing, be that TDD (with _test-first!_) or comprehensive suites of Unit, Component, Integration, Load, Stress, Penetration testing, is time.

That's not the fault of the tests. That is _your_ fault. You have set that expectation! We have to break that cycle, and start being professional.

I can't speak for everyone, but I know my career started in what seemed like an era absent of clean code, let alone testing. I had a great deal to learn regarding syntax, framework, domain. There were many senior to me (though no [actual senior developers]), and although they had plenty of practical advice on the aforementioned subjects, design patterns, SOLID, testing, and so forth, were simply not taught.

##Guru

By chance, I ended up working with a guy called _Phil Bennett_ (name and shame time, sorry Phil). I had heard whispers within the company about how excellent this guy was, though having never worked with Phil or even seen his code before, I reserved judgement. 

It was mind blowing. His code was like nothing I could have imagined at the time; achieving the impossibly complex with such simple classes, such small readable methods. So many patterns throughout the code, and yet nothing seemed duplicated. His teachings came from more than 20 years experience in development. It wasn't just tips on how to correct small portions of my own code, it was lessons in OOP. Fundamentals that had been around since the dawn of computing; Terminology new to me, yet had been around long before I was born.

I was reborn anew. My guru preached the lessons of others, pushing me towards literature, books, videos. I was constantly embarrassed by how very little I had actually learned in previous years, but far more excited at just how much depth there was to go. Just how radically different my approaches and techniques would be going forward.


  [actual senior developers]: http://
